# Provisional version 0.1 of the Launcher Plugin Specification.

This is a provisional document, feel free to open issues for discussion regarding parts you think are wrong or missing for a final version of the specification.

The goal for version 0.1 is to get the basic required specification for a generic protocol between launchers and plugins that can be extended in a non breaking way in future minor versions updates.

## Why ?

There are many launcher type applications, each usually come with its own plugin system which limits the ecosystem to whatever its creator or community manages to produce and also limits it to the language the launcher is written in.

The idea behind this specification is to make plugins which run in a different process with a unified protocol.

For the launcher developers this would allow tapping into a greater ecosystem and out-of-process plugins can increase stability.

For the plugin developers this will allow them to implement their idea once in their favorite language.

In the future generic wrappers could be written for the most popular languages and frameworks that implement the specification.

A meta-plugin can also be created for launchers that do not support this specification.

## Compatibility with different launcher styles

This specification tries to be comprehensive regarding the required features for having a good launcher experience.

The [entry object](#entryobject) (a result from the plugin) tries to answer most of the options launchers have, but the launcher can decide which parts of the result it supports.

## The big picture

1. The launcher parses the metadata.json file from the plugin directory.

2. The launcher executes the plugin process, and the processes talk in the protocol described below via the plugin process standard input and output (plugins should take care and not write generic output to the standard input / output, but they can emit errors to the standard error).

3. The protocol is mainly an exchange of asynchronous messages that are communicated between the processes in response to previous messages as described later in the specification.

## Metadata.json file

This file, named metadata.json, is a JSON document that has everything needed by the launcher to know how to launch the plugin that lives in the same directory as the metadata.json file.

The onus on finding and setting up the required runtime and dependencies for a plugin is on the plugin itself, but container technology or general shell scripts (for finding node or python on linux or windows) or even embedding them can help with that.

To support different options, you can give multiple options to try running the plugin (such as first try docker or maybe try a linux shell script, then a windows batch file, etc...).

metadata object

name | type | description
---|:---:|---
information | informationmetadataobject | Information for discovery and display
runtime | runtimemetadataobject | How to run the plugin

informationmetadataobject object

name | type | description
---|:---:|---
name | string | name of the plugin
version | string | version of the plugin
description | string | description of what the plugin does
author | string | author of the plugin
url | string | homepage of the plugin
keywords | array[string] | list of discovery keywords

runtimemetadataobject object

name | type | description
---|:---:|---
command | array[string] or array[array[string]] | command or array of commands to try to run the plugin
errorMessage | string | error message to display in case plugin can't start

If command is an array[string] the launcher will try the command to run the plugin process.

If command is array[array[string]] the launcher will try to run in order each one of the commands until the plugin successfully runs (until it gets an helloclient message in response to an helloserver message).

The executable will run in the metadata.json directory path.

### Example metadata.json file

```json
{
    "information": {
        "name": "l33t calculator",
        "version": "1.0",
        "description": "I can calculate!",
        "author": "mario",
        "url": "http://calcaultor.l33t/",
        "keywords": ["calculator", "scientific-calculator"]
    },
    "runtime": {
        "command": [
            [
                "docker", "run", "--rm", "-i", "launcherplugin/leetcalculator", "python", "calc.py"
            ],
            [
                "python", "calc.py"
            ],
            [
                "pyhton3.bat", "calc.py"
            ]
        ],
        "errorMessage": "This plugin needs python or docker to run"
    }
}
```

## The message format

Each message is a combination of headers (HTTP) and body (JSON-RPC 2.0).

This format allows us to piggyback on visual studio code's jsonrpc wire format and use existing libraries for talking such as nodejs's [vscode-jsonrpc](https://www.npmjs.com/package/vscode-jsonrpc) module.

### Headers

Headers are implemented exactly like the HTTP Headers specification.

Each header is a 'key: value' ascii encoded string ended with a windows newline '\r\n' and the headers end with an empty '\r\n' line.

Each message must pass a Content-Length key with the value being the number of bytes the body has. Currently, no other headers are supported.

### Body

The body is UTF-8 JSON encoded by the [JSON-RPC 2.0](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/JSON-RPC#Version_2.0) specification. To facilitate asynchronous updates, currently all the messages are encoded as notifications, not request and response pairs. Each message body is a object with 3 keys:

name | type | description
---|:---:|---
jsonrpc | string | always set to 2.0
method | string | the name of the message being sent in lower case
params | array or object | the message parameters described below

* a JSON object is a mapping or dictionary in other languages.

### Example Message

```json
Content-Length:97\r\n
\r\n
{
    "jsonrpc": "2.0",
    "method": "helloserver", 
    "params": {
        "name": "Generic Launcher Implementation",
        "apiversions": ["v0.1"]
    }
}
```

## Error handling

* In case of a protocol error (invalid method or invalid params for a method) the recipient should send an Error message back as described below.

* Invalid data sent over the wire (non parsable) should abort the connection and kill the plugin process.

* The launcher should disable the plugin until the user manually re-enables it in the following cases: Crash of the plugin, plugin process returns non 0 exit code, unparsable data on the connection, bad behavior such as spam, failure in the handshake process.

## Messages

Each message is a JSON-RPC 2.0 notification that is initiated by the Launcher or the Plugin.

The [flow section](#flow) below describes the logic between the messages.

### HelloServer (Launcher)

method: helloserver  
params: helloserverparams object

helloserverparams object  

name | type | description
---|:---:|---
name | string | The launcher name and version
apiversions | array[string] | The API versions supported

This should be the first message sent after the connection is established.

Currently only version "v0.1" string should be supported.

### HelloClient (Plugin)

method: helloclient  
params: helloclientparams object

helloclientparams object  

name | type | description
---|:---:|---
name | string | The plugin name and version
apiversion | string | The selected API version

This should be the second message in response to HelloServer, selecting the supported api version of the plugin.

### Error (Both)

method: error  
params: errorparams object

errorparams object

name | type | description
---|:---:|---
method | string | The method which had a problem
message | string | A message describing the error

This should be sent whenever an unexpected message or parameter was encountered.

### Request (Launcher)

method: request  
params: requestparams object

requestparams object

name | type | description
---|:---:|---
id | string | A unique id for this request
text | string | The text entered in the search field

This should be sent typically when the launcher has received a previously EntriesFinished (or if no request has yet to be sent) and deemed that a new request should be sent.

The id is a means to tell apart different EntriesFinished replies, since the protocol is asynchronous, a plugin might sent an EntriesFinished before knowing the launcher has already sent another request.

### EntriesAdd (Plugin)

method: entriesadd  
params: array[entry]

<a name="entryobject"></a>entry object

name | type | description
---|:---:|---
id | string | A unique id for this entry
text | string | The text to be displayed in the list
texthtml | string | An HTML formatted text string
score | number | A float between 0 and 1 for sorting
subtext | string | subtext for the entry
subtexthtml | string | An HTML formatted subtext string
icon | string | local file URI or [Data URI](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/HTTP/Basics_of_HTTP/Data_URIs) for image
data | string | local file URI or [Data URI](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/HTTP/Basics_of_HTTP/Data_URIs)
top | string | true or false (default false) for making this in the top of the results
selectable | string | true or false (default true) for making this item selectable to the plugin
subentries | array[entry] | sub entries

Populate results in the launcher. This message can be sent multiple times per request. Also this message can be used to update previous entries by sending the same id.

The only required fields here are id and text.

The data string can encode anything the launcher can use for showing a quick preview (or file to act upon selection), including an HTML Data URI.

If the selectable option is set to false, the launcher should not call EntrySelect upon selection, but try to do something useful with the result.

Subentries should be displayed in accordance with the GUI layout of the launcher. If it's a two column, they can show up on the right side. If it's a one column, they can show up directly under their parent entry or be shown with a special interaction on the parent entry.

The subentries are not to be recursive.

The texthtml, subtexthtml are for launchers that support showing the text with html formatting. The plugin should always provide a regular text version for launchers that do not.

### EntriesFinished (Plugin)

method: entriesfinished  
params: string

This message signals the launcher that there are no more results for the request sent with the id in the params.

### EntriesRemove (Plugin)

method: entriesremove  
params: array[string]

Remove previous entries added by EntriesAdd by their id.

### EntriesRemoveAll (Plugin)

method: entriesremoveall  
params: null

Remove all previously added entries.

### EntrySelect (Launcher)

method: entryselect  
params: string

Cause the plugin to act on a selection of a previously added entry by it's id.

### Shutdown (Launcher)

method: shutdown  
params: null

Cause the plugin to do cleanup and close the connection.

### Debug (Plugin)

method: debug
params: string

Send a line of unstructured data to the launcher for debugging.

## <a name="flow"></a>Flow

After the connection is established, the launcher must advertise it's api version support with the HelloServer message. The plugin must reply back with the selected api version with a HelloClient message.

While the protocol is pretty flexible with the asynchronous updating flow, both sides can easily turn it into a single one shot synchronous flow if they don't require something more flexible in the examples below.

### Plugin implementing a single one shot synchronous flow (even if the launcher doesn't)

1. Receive an Request message, keep it's Id.

2. Send an EntriesRemoveAll to the launcher.

3. Calculate the result.

4. Send an EntriesAdd with the results

5. Send an EntriesFinished with the Request id.

6. Goto #1

### Launcher implementing a single on shot synchronous flow to the GUI (even if the plugin doesn't)

1. Send an Request message

2. Keep a temporary object with previous results since last EntriesRemoveAll.

3. Populate and update the temporary object with EntriesAdd and EntriesRemove and EntriesRemoveAll messages from the plugin.

4. Wait for EntriesFinished with the Request id, and only then update the GUI.

5. Goto #1

* The asynchronous way is that each Entries* message from the plugin should update it's GUI representation immediately.

### Ordering of entries

1. By the score each entry has. Entry without score should have a default score of 0.0 .

2. For entries with the same score, the order that the entries are received top to bottom in an array result, and older on top for multiple results.

3. It is up to the launcher to decide if to sort results per plugin or globally (While trying to respect the top field in an entry object).

### Flow remarks

1. Both sides should process the incoming messages in the order they are received.

2. Both sides should not spam the other side with unneeded messages. (The launcher can wait some timeout for keyboard inactivity before sending a request, The plugin can do the same before starting to process the request, to look out for more recent requests).

3. An empty Request text should send the plugin to idle mode and send back a EntriesRemoveAll message.

4. The plugin should always send a EntriesFinished when it knows it will not send any more results to a given Request it encountered (even if it skips it because there is a newer one).

## Open issues for this version

It should be noted that while there are many issues that can be added which are not addressed by this version, they can be added in a non breaking way in future versions.

* Should it be enforced in the specification to not allow more then one concurrent request ?

* Should we force launcher executing the plugin as shell ?

* Are there loose ends / ambiguous definitions or flows in the specification ?

* What is the license for this specification ?

* Can this specification be used to use the plugins for non launchers usage style, such as from command line (in a unified way), etc ?
